# SQLInspector

SQLInspector is a Django project designed to monitor and inspect SQL queries generated by Django's ORM. Understanding the SQL queries being made can significantly help in optimizing database operations, ensuring that the application is running at its best efficiency. By using SQLInspector, developers can easily see the SQL queries generated, which aids in the development and optimization process.

## Why use SQLInspector?

- **Performance:** To ensure that you're using the most performant and efficient ways of fetching data.
- **Multiple Models and Relationships:** As your application grows and integrates more complex models and relationships, ensuring that your queries remain optimized becomes crucial.
- **Beyond Django ORM:** If your application outgrows the Django ORM, or you find a need to write raw SQL queries, understanding the auto-generated SQL can serve as a helpful guide.
- **Diagnostic Tool:** It helps in diagnosing non-performant SQL queries and provides insights into potential optimizations.

## How it Works?

Every SQL query made by the application is recorded. SQLInspector allows you to access these recorded queries and display them in the terminal.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python
- pip
- virtualenv (optional, but recommended)

### Steps to Setup and Run:

1. **Clone the Repository:**

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/aryaman-awasthi/SQLInspector.git
   cd SQLInspector
   ```

2. **Set Up a Virtual Environment (Recommended):**

   ```bash
   python -m venv env
   source env/bin/activate  # On Windows use `env\Scripts\activate`
   ```

3. **Install Dependencies:**

   Make sure you're in the project directory and then run:

   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Run Migrations (If Required):**

   Ensure that the database models are in sync with the database schema:

   ```bash
   python manage.py migrate
   ```

5. **Run the Server:**

   ```bash
   python manage.py runserver
   ```

   This will start the development server on `http://127.0.0.1:8000/`. Visit this URL in your browser to start using SQLInspector.
## Installation

To install the SQLInspector middleware via pip, use:

```bash
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ sql-inspector
```

## How to Use

Integrating SQLInspector into your Django project is straightforward. Once you've installed the middleware, the next steps ensure its proper functioning:

## Integration Steps:

1. **Add to MIDDLEWARE in settings.py:**

    After you have installed the SQLInspector via pip, you need to add it to your Django application's `MIDDLEWARE` settings. 

    Open your `settings.py` file and locate the `MIDDLEWARE` section. Add the following line:

    ```python
    'sql-inspector.middleware.querychecker_middleware',
    ```

    Ensure you add it in the appropriate order. For instance, if you have other middleware that processes database queries, you might want to adjust the order to ensure SQLInspector captures the raw queries before any other processing takes place.

2. **Monitor Your Queries:**

    With SQLInspector now integrated, you can monitor, analyze, and optimize your SQL queries in real-time as your application runs.

Remember, SQLInspector doesn't just capture the queries; it provides valuable insights into their performance and efficiency. By understanding the underlying SQL, you can make the necessary adjustments to your Django ORM operations, ensuring optimal database interactions.

Happy optimizing!




## Contributor:

### Aryaman Awasthi

- **GitHub:** [aryaman-awasthi](https://github.com/aryaman-awasthi)
- **LinkedIn:** [Aryaman Awasthi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aryaman-awasthi/)
